Does exposure to drought and floods predict long-distance social relationships in humans?
Anne Pisor & James Holland Jones (?)
Version: May 24, 2020

1. INTRODUCTION
A likely adaptation to a high-risk foraging ecology, humans show flexible interest in long-distance social relationships – greater interest than observed among our closest relatives, for example (Pisor & Surbeck 2019). Building long-distance social relationships are just one of a number of flexible behavioral adaptations humans can use to manage risk, however, including diet diversification, storage (which, for market-integrated or -integrating peoples, includes savings), and within-community cooperative relationships (Agrawal 2010; Halstead & O’Shea 1982, 1989; Spielmann 1986; Thornton & Masafi 2010). Based on our characterizations of the risks posed by different environmental hazards (Pisor & Jones in prep), we expect that if individuals have experienced floods and droughts in the past, they will have behavioral adaptations to manage the risks posed by those hazards. However, if hazards are chronic (for example, of long duration) or if they are more highly autocorrelated (that is, tend to occur closer together in time), behavioral adaptations that are local – including storage or savings, switching to less-preferred foods, and within-community sharing – are likely to be depleted, favoring investment in alternative adaptations such as long-distance social relationships (Minnis 1985; Pisor & Jones in prep). Long-distance social relationships are not only a source of trade, but also reciprocal access to food, land, and a place to sleep (Pisor & Surbeck 2019).

In the present study, we investigate whether exposure to low levels of precipitation (that is, droughts) and high levels of precipitation (flooding, high water levels, landslides) – especially long-term, recurrent, or autocorrelated exposure – is a better predictor of investment in long-distance cooperative relationships than within-community cooperative relationships. Our primary considerations are the effects of (1) a greater number of intervals of excess or low rainfall, indicating repeated exposure, and (2) temporally autocorrelated exposure, such that one exposure is likely to follow closely behind another; however, we also consider (3) cumulative exposure across the lifespan, as the depletion of local risk-management options may be cumulative over longer time periods. We draw on data collected by AP among Bolivian horticulturalists (slash-and-burn farmers) with respect to their migration histories, within-community relationships, and between-community relationships. These individuals live in a river valley called Alto Beni in the La Paz Department of Bolivia. We combine these with Standard Precipitation Index data from the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR; (Standardardized Precipitation Index (SPI) for global land surface (1949-2012), 2013)) to estimate participant exposure to excess and low precipitation.

2. HYPOTHESES, PREDICTIONS, EXPLORATORY ANALYSES, AND ANTICIPATED THIRD VARIABLES
2.1 Central hypotheses and predictions
H1: Adults who have experienced repeated droughts (or excess precipitation) during their lifetimes will be more likely to report having long-distance relationships than those who have experienced less frequent droughts (or excess precipitation).
•	P1: Bolivian horticulturalists who have experienced a greater number of intervals that include precipitation (averaged across a three month window) with 1 SD below the local average or lower (or 1 SD above the local average or higher) will report a greater number of friendships with people who live outside of Alto Beni.
Alternative H1: Adults who have experienced repeated droughts (or excess precipitation) during their lifetimes will be more likely to report having same-community relationships than those who have experienced less frequent droughts (or excess precipitation).
•	Alternative P1: Bolivian horticulturalists who have experienced a greater number of intervals that include precipitation (averaged across a three month window) with 1 SD below the local average or lower (or 1 SD above the local average or higher) will be more likely to report a reciprocity-based relationship with a member of their local community.

H2: Adults who have experienced droughts (or excess precipitation) that are more temporally autocorrelated during their lifetimes will be more likely to report having long-distance relationships.
•	P2: Bolivian horticulturalists who have experienced more autocorrelation between intervals that include precipitation (averaged across a three month window) with 1 SD below the local average or lower (or 1 SD above the local average or higher) at a one-year lag will report a greater number of friendships with people who live outside of Alto Beni.
Alternative H2: Adults who have experienced droughts (or excess precipitation) that are more temporally autocorrelated during their lifetimes will be more likely to report having same-community relationships.
•	Alternative P2: Bolivian horticulturalists who have experienced more autocorrelation between intervals that include precipitation (averaged across a three month window) with 1 SD below the local average or lower (or 1 SD above the local average or higher) will be more likely to report a reciprocity-based relationship with a member of their local community.

2.2 Exploratory analysis: Length of exposure
H3: Adults who have spent a larger proportion of their lives in periods of drought (or excess precipitation) will be more likely to report having long-distance relationships.
•	P3: Bolivian horticulturalists who have spent more of their lives in intervals that include precipitation (averaged across a three month window) with 1 SD below the local average or lower (or 1 SD above the local average or higher) will report a greater number of friendships with people who live outside of Alto Beni.
Alternative H3: Adults who have spent a larger proportion of their lives in periods of drought (or excess precipitation) will be more likely to report having same-community relationships.
•	Alternative P3: Bolivian horticulturalists who have spent more of their lives in intervals that include precipitation (averaged across a three month window) with 1 SD below the local average or lower (or 1 SD above the local average or higher) will be more likely to report a reciprocity-based relationship with a member of their local community.

3. DATA COLLECTION
In March-June 2017, members of two horticulturalists communities in the Bolivian lowlands, in the La Paz Department of Bolivia, were interviewed by AP about their migration histories, friends who they do not see in person often, and whether there is a member of their community with whom they have a reciprocal cooperative relationship. A total of n=124 individuals participated. Given variable literacy across participants, but familiarity with signing documents, consent forms were read aloud and participants provided written (that is, signed) consent. All field protocols were approved by the Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology Department of Human Behavior, Ecology, and Culture, and declared exempt from additional IRB oversight.

4. PREPARATION OF PREDICTORS AND OUTCOMES
4.1 Drought and excess precipitation exposure 
4.1.1 Precipitation data. Daily precipitation accumulation data from the departments in which participants had lived, both within and outside Bolivia, were downloaded from the NCAR Computational and Information Systems Laboratory (Standardardized Precipitation Index (SPI) for global land surface (1949-2012), 2013). Data were available from January 1, 1949 through December 31, 2012. Daily precipitation accumulation tends to follow a gamma distribution (Martinez Villalobos & Neelin 2019). However, common practice in meteorological science is to average daily precipitation accumulation by month or by longer periods, up to 48 months in length, and then normalize these gamma-distributed data into a z-distribution (Orlowsky & Seneviratne 2013). This approximation of the gamma by a standard normal distribution is appropriate as long as the shape parameter is large enough, which it usually is for precipitation data. The resulting index is called the Standardized Precipitation Index (SPI), a moving average calculated over intervals of anywhere from three months to 48 months and reported on the halfway point of that window (e.g., the SPI for a three-month window including January, February, and March would be reported for February; McKee et al. 1993). We focus on the shortest of these intervals, three months, because of our focus on the impact of precipitation on human livelihoods (World Meteorological Association 2012). For the two communities in Bolivia, even one month of high precipitation can cause the failure of crucial cash crops, including papaya, cacao, and yuca; as such, we take a three-month window of below-average or above-average precipitation as “long-term” exposure to excess or low levels of precipitation. Per common practice, when there is a period of below-average precipitation and at least one month reaches -1 SD or lower, the interval from when precipitation goes negative (that is, falls below the average) and then returns to positive is considered the length of the drought; the opposite is true (i.e., at least one month of 1 SD or higher) to estimate the length of excess precipitation (McKee et al. 1993).

4.1.1.1 Limitations. As aforementioned, gamma-distributed data can be converted to a normal distribution without loss of information if the shape parameter is large enough. In particularly arid environments, data can be too zero-inflated to be approximated by a gamma distribution (Mishra & Singh 2010). However, only one department in our data set -- Tarapacá, in Chile -- has many zero values for precipitation, and only two participants are coded as having lived in Tarapacá. As such, the potential effects of an inappropriate conversion of gamma to standardized normal in the case of Tarapacá is unlikely to affect our results.
There is within-department variation in rainfall that is masked when the SPI for a particular month is averaged at the department level. For example, the La Paz Department includes rainforest, cloud forest, and Andean plateaus, all with a very different precipitation profile. However, because AP asked only about department of residence, we do not have finer-grained data with which to assess participants’ exposure to precipitation.

The NCAR dataset did not include data from before 1949. (We attempted to remedy this problem with raw data of daily weather station precipitation data from NOAA, however there are few data available for Bolivian stations before the 1980s.) As such, we are unable to account for participants’ exposure to precipitation if they were born before 1949; this affects a total of three participants. The NCAR dataset also did not include data from after 2012, affecting all participants in the sample.

4.1.2 Migration data. Participants were asked to name the departments (that is, provinces; called departamentos in Bolivia) in which they had lived or to which they had traveled during their lives. Participants reported the ages at which they went to each location. Because data were collected as ages rather than dates, the finest-grained inference we can do in terms of when a participant lived in a place is if they lived there for an entire year, uninterrupted. A total of 55 (of n=124) participants reported living elsewhere for at least a year. For simplicity, we assume all participants were born on January 1 and that one year of residence is January 1 to December 31. For example, if a participant was born in 1980 and reported living in Santa Cruz for a year starting at age 22, we estimate that they lived in Santa Cruz from January 1, 2002 until December 31, 2002. Two participants reported living in one location for 1.5 years and 2.5 years, respectively; these values were rounded up to the nearest whole year.

4.1.2.1 Limitations. Participants who had lived in other departments of Bolivia named the department in which they had lived. Participants who had lived abroad, usually while doing migrant labor, often named only the country in which they had lived. If they did mention the department in which they lived, or if we were able to infer it from other responses they gave, we assigned them to that department for the interval in question; if they did not mention the department, we drew on Bolivian migration data from the International Organization for Migration (IOM; Organización Internacional para las Migraciones) and AP’s ethnographic data to assign participants to the department where they were most likely to have lived (e.g., Buenos Aires in Argentina, Tarapacá in Chile). Only nine individuals in the sample reported living outside of Bolivia, so these assignments affect few individuals in our sample.

To estimate the intervals during which participants lived in the La Paz Department, AP removed intervals during which participants reported living elsewhere; for all other intervals, they were considered La Paz residents. For example, if a 40 year-old participant was born in the La Paz Department but briefly moved to Chile from ages 21-22, they were recorded as living in the La Paz Department from 0-20, in Chile from ages 21-22, and in the La Paz Department from ages 23-40. Note that participants may have engaged in shorter-term migration the time they were coded as living in the La Paz Department: for example, a six-month stint in the Pando Department would not be captured.

4.1.3 Precipitation data per location. To estimate a participant’s exposure to long-term drought (or excess precipitation), we use a combination of the SPI data, their migration history, and shapefiles (Hijmans, n.d.) of the departments in Bolivia and neighboring countries. SPI data obtained from NCAR (Section 4.1.1) are summarized in a grid of 1 longitude by 1 latitude cells; using shapefiles delimiting the boundaries of each department, we matched SPI data to the provinces in which they fell. We then averaged the SPI across all cells inside a given department for a particular month (e.g., all SPIs inside the Santa Cruz Department in May 1990 were averaged). Participants were then said to experience this averaged SPI if they lived in a particular department during a particular month.

(H1) To estimate a participant’s recurring exposure to drought (or excess precipitation), we counted the number of closed intervals during which the departmental SPI fell below 1 SD (or above 1 SD) and divided by a participant’s total years alive. Note that per McKee et al. (1993), a closed interval for drought begins when precipitation falls below average, if at some point during that below-average interval the SPI falls below 1 SD, and ends when the SPI again reaches average or higher; the inverse is true for excess precipitation. If participants moved between departments during an interval of below-average or above-average precipitation, we continue that interval in the new location. For example, if a participant was an above-average interval with at least one SPI value above 1 SD in the Pando Department and, during that interval, moved to the Oruro Department, if Oruro was likewise in an above-average interval, the interval continues for that participant until the SPI value in Oruro returns to average; if they moved to Oruro and Oruro was in an average or below-average interval, that closes the interval.

(H2) To estimate the autocorrelation of a participant’s recurring exposure to drought (or excess precipitation), we first assign each participant a binary index indicating whether, during each month of their lives, they were experiencing a drought (or excess precipitation) according to the +1 SD (or -1 SD) approach used with the SPI (McKee et al. 1994). There are thus two separate binary indices per participant, one for drought and one for excess precipitation. We then assess the autocorrelation between the presence of drought across months of a participant’s life (and do the same for excess precipitation), extracting the value at a one-year lag (which assesses, for example, the extent to which there is autocorrelation between the May-June-July windows across years of a participant’s life, as well as the September-October-November windows, etc.). This lag one autocorrelation allows us to compare participants with respect to whether they are likely to experience three bad months again during the same window the following year. <! -- I'm not sure this is the best way to do what I have in mind. An STL decomposition approach didn’t fit the bill, I don’t think, and I’m happy to talk about why. -->

(H3) To estimate a participant’s cumulative exposure to drought (or excess precipitation), we counted months of a participant’s life during which the departmental SPI was below 1 SD (or was above 1 SD) by summing the binary indices described above and then divided by their total months alive. Note that this does not follow the interval approach in (H1) (McKee et al. 1993): only the months that fall below 1 SD or above 1 SD are counted, not entire intervals that contain a month with at least -1 SD or +1 SD.

4.2 Long-distance relationships
Participants were asked to count their number of friends “who live elsewhere, whom they see only once in a while.” AP then asked participants to identify where these friends live (by community or city name, inside of Bolivia, or by country name outside of Bolivia) and whether they and their friends “help each other” or “do favors for each other.” We parameterize number of long-distance relationships in two different ways. First, for our primary analyses, we consider the total number of individuals named in response to this question, which ranges from 0-4. (As only one individual named five, we consider only the first four.) Second, as a robusticity check, we consider only the friends with whom the participant reported some type of reciprocity, again ranging from 0-4; for 46% of all named friends, participants reported that they and their friends did not help one another. This makes the parameter more comparable to that for same-community relationships, which explicitly referred to reciprocal relationships (Section 4.3).

4.3 Same-community relationships
Participants were asked to report whether there were any other households in their community with whom they had reciprocal sharing relationships (described as “doing favors for you and your household” or “who help you and your household”). If there was at least one household with whom they had a reciprocity-based relationship, they were asked to name the things the other household did for them and the relationship of that household to their household (e.g., neighbors, kin, friends). We parameterize the presence or absence of same-community relationships in two different ways. First, for our primary analyses, we code merely the presence or absence of a reciprocity-based relationship in the same community. Second, as a robusticity check, we code reciprocity-based relationships as “present” only if the household named was not related to the participant by blood (that is, consanguineal kinship). The assumption behind this robusticity check is that reciprocity is less expensive to maintain with consanguineal kin (Trivers, 1971); however, it is also important to note that individuals may selectively form close relationships with kin who provide them with more net benefits (Pisor & Ross in prep).

4.4 Relevant third variables
•	People who have lived in more places will have had more opportunities to make a greater number of social connections. We count the number of places in which participant has spent a month or more (that is, including places in which they lived or worked for less than a year) and include that in the model as a control for such opportunities.
•	People who are more outgoing may have more connections. We control for this by summing participant responses to two ordinal scales about how outgoing they are (adapted from the Newcastle Personality Assessor (Nettle, 2009)) and including this index in our models.
•	People who have cellphones (especially smartphones) and/or vehicles will have an easier time maintaining long-distance relationships, as they can more easily connect with or visit their contacts. We control for household cellphone or smartphone (presence/absence) and vehicle ownership (presence/absence) in our models.
•	Participants came from two different communities, each of which formed for different historical reasons: one fissioned from a long-standing mission community of Mosetén, a local indigenous group; the other was formed when indigenous Aymara from the Andes were voluntarily resettled by the government in the 1960s. Since the two communities were founded, members of other indigenous groups have joined both. While a first pass analysis (two-sample t-test) suggests no differences in number of friends named for the two communities, for example, they do differ in other respects: Mosetén community members are less likely to have lived abroad. We include community as a random effect to pool parameter estimates by community and account for unobserved variance.
•	We are neutral with respect to how far away non-local connections must live from the participant to buffer the risks posed by drought or excess precipitation. In another paper, we assess the role of degree of spatial autocorrelation for different resource shocks in the formation of long-distance relationships (Jones & Pisor in prep); here we focus on a simple measure of temporal autocorrelation.
•	Note that we also do not have information on the occupations of long-distance connections. One might imagine that a long-distance connection involved in an industry other than agriculture might be better able to help buffer the effects of drought or excess rainfall, even if they live closer than rather than further away. This possibility should be studied in future work.

5. PLANNED ANALYSES

6. REFERENCES
Hijmans, R. (n.d.). DIVA-GIS. Retrieved May 1, 2020, from http://www.diva-gis.org/gdata
Nettle, D. (2009). Personality: What Makes You the Way You Are. Cary, NC: Oxford University Press.
Standardardized Precipitation Index (SPI) for global land surface (1949-2012). (2013). https://doi.org/10.5065/D6086397
Trivers, B. R. L. (1971). The evolution of reciprocal altruism. The Quarterly Review of Biology, 46(1), 35–57. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/2822435

